the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
to view additional materials from
hundreds of MIT courses visit MIT open
courseware at
ocw.mit.edu Okay
so yesterday we learned about equations
of planes and how to think of 3x3 linear
systems in terms of intersections of
planes and how to think about them
geometrically and that in particular led
us to see in which cases actually we
don't have a unique solution to the
system but maybe we have no Solutions or
infinitely many solutions because maybe
the line of intersection of two of the
planes happens to be parallel to the
other plane
so to today
well we'll start by looking at equations
of
lines
and so in a
way it seems like something that we've
already seen last time
because we have
seen that we can think of a line as the
intersection of two
planes and we know what equations of
planes look like so we could describe a
line by two equations telling us about
the two planes that intersect on the
line that's not the most convenient way
to think about a line usually for
because you know when you have these two
equations how do you solve them well
okay you can but takes a bit of effort
so instead there's another represent a
of a
line so if you have a line in space well
you can imagine maybe that you have a
point on it and that point is moving in
time and the line is the trajectory of a
point As Time varies okay so think of a
line as the
trajectory of a moving
point
and so when we think of the trajectory
of a moving point that's called a
parametric
equation okay so we're going to learn
about parametric equations of
lines
so let's say for
example that we are looking at the
line
for so to specify a line in space I can
do that by giving you two points on the
line or by giving you a point and a
vector parallel to the line for
example so let's say I give you two
points on the line minus one to
two and the other point will be let's
say 1 3
so okay it's pretty good because we have
two points in that line now how do we
find all the other points well you know
there have a points in between these
guys and also on either side um let's
imagine that we have a point that's
moving on the
line and at Time
Zero it's here at
q0 and in a unit time I'm not telling
you what the unit is you know it could
be a second could be an hour could be a
year at tals 1 it's going to be at q1
and it moves at constant speed so maybe
at Time 1 12 it's going to be here time
two it will be over there and in fact
that point Didn't Start here maybe it
was you know it's always been moving on
that line at time minus two it was down
there so
let's say Q of T is a moving
point
and at tal
Z it's at
q0 and let's say that it
moves well we could make it move in any
way we want but probably the easiest to
find so our goal is going to find
formulas
for the position of this moving point in
terms of T and we'll use that to say
well any point on the line is of this
form where you know you have to plug in
the correct value of T depending on when
it's hit by the moving point so perhaps
it's easiest to do it if we make it move
at constant
speed
on the line and that speed is chosen so
that at time one it's at
q1 so the question we want to
answer is what
is the
position at a time
T so the Point Q of
T well Tove that we have an easy
observation which is that the vector
from q0 to Q of
T is proportional to the vector from q0
to
q1 and what's the proportionality Factor
here yeah it's exactly T at time one q0
Q is exactly the same okay maybe I
should draw another picture again I have
q0 I have
q1 and after time
T I'm here at Q of T where this Vector
from q0 to Q of
T is actually going to be T * the vector
q0
q1 so when T increases it gets longer
and longer
okay
so does everybody see this now is that
okay any questions about
that
yes okay so I will try to avoid using
blue thanks for uh that's fine so okay I
will not use blue
anymore okay
well for this time let me just make
everything white for just for now this
is Vector from q0 to Q of T this is the
point Q of
T okay is it kind of visible now yes
okay thanks thanks for
pointing it out I will switch to
pyol
so okay so apart from that I claim now
we can find the position of this moving
point because well this Vector q0 q1 we
can find from the coordinates of q0 and
q1 so we just subtract the coordinates
of q0 from those of q1 we'll get that
Vector q0 q1 is 2 1us
okay so if I look at
it well so let's
call X of
t y of
T and Z of T the coordinate of the point
that's moving on the line then we
get X of
T minus well actually + one
equals t *
2 right I'm writing the components of
vector q0 Q of T and here I'm wrting T *
q0
q1 y of t - 2 equal
T and Z of tus 2
equals minus 3 T So in other
terms the more familiar way that we'll
use to write these
equations let me do it that way
instead minus 1 + 2
t y of T = 2 + t z of t equal
2 minus 3 T and if you prefer I can just
say Q of T is q0 plus T * the vector q0
q1
okay so that's our first parametric
equation of a line in this class and I
hope you see it's not extremely hard in
fact so parametric equations of lines
always look like that X Y and T are
functions of T that are of the form a
constant plus a constant time T the
coefficients of T tell us about a vector
along the line here we have
vector q0 q1 which is 2
13 and the constant terms tell us about
where we are at t equal 0 if I plug t
equal Z if these guys go away I get
minus1 2 two that's my starting
point
okay
so any questions about
that
no okay so let's see now what we can do
with these parametric
equations so one
application is
to think about the relative position of
a line and a plane with respect to each
other
so let's say that we take still the same
line up
there and let's
consider the plane with equation x + 2 y
+ 4 Z = 7 okay so I'm giving you this
plane and the questions that we're going
to ask ourselves are well does the line
intersect the plane and where does it
intersect the
plane
so let's start with
uh first preliminary question that maybe
we should try to understand we have
these points you know we have this plane
and we have these points q0 and q1 I'm
going to draw them in completely random
places well are q0 and q1 on the same
side of a plane or on different
side on opposite sides of the planes or
could it be that maybe one of the points
is in the
plane so I think I'm going to let you
vote on
that
so is that readable is it too
small okay so anyway the question says
uh relative to the plane x + 2 y + 4 Z =
7 these points q0 and q1 are they on the
same side on opposite sides is one of
them on the plane we can't
decide okay should be
better so I see relatively few
answers okay it looks like also a lot of
you have forgotten their cards and
uh so I see people raising two fingers I
see people raising three fingers and I
see people raising four fingers I don't
see anyone and in number one so the
general idea seems to be that either
they're on opposite sides or maybe one
of them is on the
plane well let's try to see is one of
them on the
plane well let's check okay so let's
look at the point Sorry I have one more
Blackboard to use
here so if I take the point q0 which is
at minus 1 2 2 well if I
plug that into the plane equation so x +
2 y + 4 Z will equal -1 + 2 * 2 + 4 *
that's well 4 + 8 12 - 1
11 that I think is bigger than seven
okay so q0 is not in the plane
let's try again with
q1 1
31 well if we plug that into x + 2 y + 4
Z we'll have 1 + 2 * 3 makes seven but
we add 4 * 1 we end up with three less
than 7 well that one is not in the plane
either so I don't think actually that
the answer should be number
three so let's get rid of answer number
three
okay
um let's see in the light of
this are you willing to reconsider your
previous answers
and okay so I think now everyone seems
to be interested in answering number two
and I would agree with that answer so
let's think about it
these points are not in the plane but
they're not in the plane in different
ways one of them somehow overshoots we
get 11 the other one we only get three
that's less than seven if you think
about how a plane splits space into two
half spaces on either side well one of
them is going to be the points where x +
2 y + 4 Z is less than 7 and the other
one will
be so that's somehow this side and
that's where q1 is and the other
side is where x + 2 y + 4 Z is actually
bigger than
7 and to go from one to the
other well x + 2 y + 4 Z needs to go
through the value seven if it you know
if you're moving along any path from q0
to
q1 this thing will change continuously
from 11 to three at some time it has to
go through
S does that make sense so to go from q0
to q1 we need to cross P at some
place so there are opposite
sides
okay now that doesn't quite finish
answering the question that we had which
was where do where does the line
intersect the
plane but well we can do the same thing
now we know not only the points q0 and
q1 we know actually any point on the
line because we have that parametric
equation up there telling us where is
the point that's moving on the line at
time t
so what about the moving point Q of
T well let's plug its coordinates into
the plane equation so we'll take X of t
plus tce y of t + 4 Z of
T okay that's equal
to well -1 + 2
t plus
twice 2 + t + 4 *
2 - 3
T so if you simplify this sub bit you
get 2 t + 2 t - 12T that should be - 8 T
and the constant term is min - 1 + 4 + 8
is
11 okay and we have to compare that
with seven okay question is is this ever
equal to
seven
well so Q of T is in the
plane exactly when - 8 T + 11 =
7 and that's the same if you manipulate
this you will get T equals
okay in fact that's not very surprising
if you look at this values 11 and three
you see that seven is actually right in
between it's the average of these two
numbers so it would make sense that it's
halfway in between q0 and q1 that we
will get
seven okay
and then at that time Q at
time2 well let's plug the
values so -1 + 2 T will
be 0
2 + T will be 2 and a half or five
halves and 2us 3es will be 1
okay so this is where the line
intersects the
plane
so you see that's actually a pretty easy
way of finding where a line and a plane
intersect each other if we can find a
parametric equation of a line and an
equation of a plane then we basically
just plug one into the other and see at
what time the moving point point hits
the plane and then we know where it
is okay are there questions about
this uh
yes sorry can you sa
it ah yes so what if we don't get a
solution what happens so indeed our line
could have been parallel to the plane or
maybe even contained in the plane well
if a line is parallel to the plane then
maybe what happens is that when we plug
in you know the positions of a moving
point we actually get something that
never equals seven because maybe we get
actually a constant say that we had
gotten I don't know 13 all the time well
when is 13 equal to seven the answer is
never okay so that's what would tell you
that the line is actually parallel to
the plane you would not find a solution
to the equation that you get at the
end
yes so if there's no solution at all to
the equation that you get it means that
you know at no time is the traveling
Point going to be on the plane that
means the line really does not hit the
plane ever so it has to be parallel
outside of it on the other hand if the
line is inside the plane then that means
that no matter what time you choose you
always get seven okay that's what would
happen if a line is in the plane you
would always get
seven so maybe I should write this
down so if a
line is in the
plane
then um what do I want to
say
when we
plug X of t y of t z of T into the
equation always gives we always give we
always
get uh well here in this case seven or
whatever the value should be for the
plane
if the line is parallel to the
in fact
we well we get should say another
constant
so in fact you know when you plug these
things normally you get a quantity
that's of the form something time t plus
a constant because that's what you plug
in into the equation of a plane and so
in General you have an equation of the
form something * t plus something equals
something and that usually has a single
solution and the special case is if this
coefficient of t turns out to be zero in
the end and that's actually going to
happen exactly when the line is either
parallel or in the
plane in
fact if you think this through carefully
the coefficient of T that you get here
see it's 1 * 2+ 2 * 1 + 4 * - 3 it's the
dot product between the normal Vector of
the plane and the vector along the
line so see this coefficient becomes
zero exactly when the line is
perpendicular to the normal Vector that
means it's parallel to the plane so
everything makes sense okay if you're
confused about what I just said you can
ignore
it okay more
questions
no okay so if not let's move
to move on to more General parametric
equations so I hope you know you've seen
here that parametric equations are a
great way to think about line in space
there also a great way to think about
actually any curve any trajectory that
can be traced Maybe by a moving
point
so
so more
generally we can use parametric
equations
for arbitrary
motions
in the
plane are in
space so let's look at an example let's
take so it's a famous curve called the
cycloid and the cyllid is something that
you can actually see sometimes at night
when people are biking
uh if they have something that reflects
light on their wheel so let me explain
what's the definition of a
cyllid
so I I should say I've seen a lecture
where actually the professor had a
volunteer on the unicycle to demonstrate
how that works
but I didn't arrange for that so instead
I will explain it to you using more
conventional
means so let's say that we have a
wheel that's
rolling on a horizontal
ground and as it's running of course
it's going to turn so it's going to move
forward to a new
position and now let's imagine that we
have a point that's been painted red on
the circumference of the wheel and
initially that point is here okay so as
the wheel starts rotating well of course
it you know it moves forward and it also
it turns on itself so that point
starts falling back behind the point of
contact because the wheel is rotating at
the same time as it's moving
forward and so the cyllid is the
trajectory of this moving
point okay so
the
cycloid is obtained by considering so we
have a wheel let's say of radius a
a okay so this height here
is
a
rolling
on floor which is the
x-axis and
let's
sorry and we have a point P that's
painted on the wheel initially it's at
the origin but of course as time goes by
it moves on the wheel so
p is a
point on the rim of the
wheel and it
starts at the
origin so the question is what
happens in particular
can we find the position of this point x
of t y of t as a function of
time okay so here's the reason why I
have this
computer
so I'm not sure if it will be very easy
to visualize
but so we have a
wheel oh that's not very well I hope you
can vaguely see that there's a Circle
that's moving the wheel is green
here and as you know there's a radius
that's been painted blue in it and that
radius rotates along the wheel as the
wheel is moving
forward so now let's try to paint
actually the trajectory of a
point okay so that's what the Cy looks
like
[Applause]
okay
so so the cyllid well I guess it doesn't
quite look like what I've drawn it looks
like it goes a bit higher up but you
know it will be the
trajectory of this red
point and see it hits the button once in
a while it forms these
arches um because well when the wheel
has rotated by a full turn then you're
basically back at the same situation
except a bit further along the road so
if we do it once
more see the point now is at the top and
now it's at the bottom and then we start
again it's at the top and then again at
the
bottom
okay
no
okay so the
question that we want to answer is what
is the
position X of t y of
T of a point p
okay so actually I'm writing X of t y of
T that means that I have you know maybe
I'm expressing the position in terms of
time let's see is time going to be a
good thing to do well certainly the
position changes over time but does it
actually matter how fast the wheel is
rolling no because you know I can just
play the motion in fast forward the
wheel will be going faster but the
trajectory is still the same so in fact
time is not the most relevant thing here
what matters to us more is how far the
wheel has gone so we could use as a
parameter for example The Distance by
which the wheel has
moved or we can do even better because
we see that really the most complicated
thing that happens here is really the
rotation so maybe we should actually use
the angle by which the wheel has turned
to parameterize the motion Okay so
there's various choices and actually you
can choose whichever one you prefer but
I think here we'll get the simplest
answer if we parameterize things by the
angle so in fact instead of T I will be
using let's call
Theta as a
function of the
angle Theta by
which the wheel
has
rotated so how are we going to do
that
well because we are going to TWI to use
our new knowledge let's try to do it
using vectors in a smart
way so let me draw a picture of a wheel
after things have rotated by a certain
amount so maybe my point P now is
here and so the wheel has rotated by
this angle
here and I want to find the position of
my point P okay so the position of this
point P that's going to be the same as
knowing the vector
op from the origin to this moving
point so I haven't really simplified the
problem
yet because we don't really know about
Vector op but maybe we know about
simpler
vectors whose sum will be
op so let's
see let's give names to a few other
points in there for example let's say
that this will be point a a is the point
where the wheel is touching the road and
B will be the center of the
wheel then it looks like maybe I have
actually a chance of
understanding vectors like maybe O A
doesn't look quite so scary or AB
doesn't look too bad BP doesn't look too
bad and if I sum them
together I will obtain
op so let's do
that so now we've greatly simplified the
problem we had to find one vector that
we didn't know now we have to find three
vectors that we don't
know um but you'll see each of them is
actually fairly easy to think about so
let's see should we start with Vector O
A
maybe so O A has two components one of
them should be very
easy well the Y component is just going
to be zero okay it's directed along the
x-
axis what about the X component so o a
is the Distance by which the wheel has
traveled to get to its current
position yeah uh I hear a lot of people
saying R Theta let me actually say a
Theta because I've called a the radius
of the wheel
so this distance is a Theta why is it a
Theta that's because the wheel well
there's an assumption which is that the
wheel is running on something normal
like a road and not on maybe you know
ice or something like that so it's
rolling without
slipping so that means
that this distance on the road is
actually equal to the distance here on
the circumference of a wheel this point
P was there
and the amount by which things have
moved can be measured either here or
here these are the same
distances
okay so that makes it a Theta and maybe
I should justify by saying
amount by
which the wheel has
red has
moved it's equal to the so the distance
from o to a is equal to the Arc Length
on the circumference of the
circle from a to
p and you know that if you have a sector
corresponding to an angle Theta then its
length is a * Theta provided that of
course you express the angle in radians
that's the reason why we always use
radians in
math okay
now let's think about Vector ab and
Vector
BP
[Music]
okay so AB is pretty easy
right because
it's pointing straight up and its length
is a so it's just 0
a okay
now the most serious one we've kept for
the end was what about Vector
BP so Vector BP we
know two things about it we know
actually its
length so the magnitude of
BP is a and we know it makes an angle an
angle Theta with the
vertical so let us find its components
let's draw a closeup
picture now in a picture where I'm going
to Center things at
B so I have my point P here I have Theta
this length is a well what are the
components of
BP well the X component is going to
be
uh almost I hear people saying things
about a but I agree with a I hear some
cosin I hear some signs I think it's
actually the
sign yes it's a sin Theta except it's
going to the left so actually it will
have a negative a sin
Theta
okay and the vertical component well it
will be a cosine Theta but also negative
because we are going downward so it's
a cosine
Theta so now we can answer the initial
question because Vector op well we'll
just add up o a a and
BP so the X component will be a Theta
minus a a sin
Theta
and Aus a cosine
okay
so any questions about
that okay so I claim that's the answer
because
this thing here is the x coordinate as a
function of theta and that one is the y
coordinate as a function of
feta so
now just to show you that we can do a
lot of things when we have a parametric
equation here's a small mystery so what
happens exactly near that bottom
Point what does that curve look like you
know the computer tells us well it looks
like it has some sort of pointy thing
but is that something on the display or
is it actually what happens
so so what do you think happens near the
bottom
point we had that picture let me show it
once
more where you know you have these
corner like things at the bottom
well actually is it indeed a corner with
some angle between the two directions
does it make an
angle
or is it actually a smooth curve without
any corner but we don't see it because
it's too small to be visible on the
computer screen does it actually make a
loop or does it actually come down and
then back up without going to the left
or to the right and without making an
angle
so yeah I
see majority votes for answers number
two or
four and well at this point we can't
quite tell so let's try to figure it out
from these formulas I mean really the
way to answer that for sure is to
actually look at the
formulas okay
so question that we're trying to answer
now is what happens
near the bottom
Point okay so how do we answer that
well
we should probably try to find simpler
formulas for these things okay so well
to simplify maybe let's divide
everything by a let's rescale everything
by a if you want let's say that we take
the unit of length to be the radius of
our wheel so instead of measuring things
in feet or meters we'll just measure
them in wheel
radius
so take the length
unit to be equal to the radius so that
means we'll have AAL 1 then our formulas
are slightly simpler we get X of theta
is Theta minus sin
Theta and y equal 1 minus
cosine okay so if we want to understand
what these things look like maybe we
should try to take some
approximation okay so what about
approximation
well probably you know that if I take
the sign of a very small angle it's
about it's close to the actual angle
itself if Theta is very
small and you know that the coine of an
angle that's very small is close to
one well that's pretty good if we use
that well we'll get Theta minus Theta 1
- one it looks like it's not precise
enough we just get zero and zero that's
not telling us much about what happens
okay so we need actually better
approximations than
that
so so hopefully you have seen in one
variable calculus something called
tailor
expansion that
oh okay uh I see
that okay so if you have not seen Taylor
expansion or if somehow it was so
traumatic that you've block it out of
your
memory um let me just remind you that
tayor expansion is a way to get a better
apprach approximation than just looking
at the function its
derivative
so and here's an example of you know
where it actually comes in handy in real
life so taor
approximation
says
that if T is small
then the value of a function f of T is
approximately equal to well our first
guess of course would be F of Z that's
the you know roughest
approximation if we want to be a bit
more precise we know that when we change
by T well T times the derivative comes
in that's the linear approximation to
how the function
changes now if we want to be even more
precise then there's another term which
is t^2 / 2 * the second
derivative and if we want to be even
more precise you'll have t Cub over 6
times the third derivative at
zero okay and you can continue and so on
but we won't need
more so if you use this here it tells
you that sign of a small angle Theta
well yeah it looks like Theta but if we
want to be more precise then we should
add minus Theta Cub over
and cosine of theta well it's not quite
one it's close to 1us Theta Square
2 okay so these are slightly better
approximations of s and cosine for small
angles
so now if we try to figure out
again what happens to our X of theta
well that will be T sorry Theta minus
Theta minus Theta Cub over
six
that's Theta cubed over six and Y on the
other
hand is going to be 1
minus that that's about Theta squ
two so now which one of them is bigger
when Theta is
small yeah Y is much larger okay if you
take the cube of a very small number it
becomes very very very
small so in fact we can look at
that you know so let me say X in
absolute value is much bigger it's much
smaller than y and in fact what we can
do is we can look at the ratio between Y
and X that tells us the slope with which
we approach the origin so
y/x is well let's let's take the ratio
of these
two that gives us 3 / Theta that tends
to
Infinity
when Theta approaches zero so that means
that the slope of our curve near the
origin is actually
infinite
and so the correct picture is really
something like this okay so the
instantaneous motion if you had to
describe what happens very very close to
the origin is that your point is
actually not moving to the left or to
the right along with the wheel it's
moving down and then up and of course I
mean at the same time it is actually
moving a little bit forward at the same
time but the dominant motion near the
origin is really that it goes down and
that up so answer number four you have a
vertical
tangent okay uh I think I'm at the end
of time so have a nice
weekend and I'll see you on Tuesday so
on Tuesday I will have practice exams
for next week's
test